- [Instructor] Now let us understand
what is session management,
but before that we need to understand an HTTP limitation,
because of which we need session management.
All the requests that happen from the client to the server
go over the HTTP protocol.
Unfortunately HTTP is a stateless protocol,
as in it does not conserve the state of conversation
between the client and the server.
Let's take a look at this diagram.
When a client or a user
comes with a request of adding an item to cart
in a shopping application
it goes to the server.
The server is going to add item to the cart
and then responds back to the client
with an appropriate message.
After this the server forgets this user.
So if the same users comes over again
and adds another item to the cart
the server is going to treat it as a new user.
If the same user comes over and over
in all these cases the server would treat it as a new user.
This is not a very good situation,
because imagine your sense on a shopping cart application
when you add a product to the cart
and when you add another product
you expect that the first product
is already lying there in the cart.
If your server does not track your shopping cart
then it is going to be a very cumbersome experience to you
as an end customer.
This essentially means that
there is a dire need to conserve that state of conversation
between the client and the server.
The server should know that it's the same user
who is coming again and again
and it should preserve the information for that user
so that it becomes easy for the state to be maintained.
So what are the solutions for this?
Let's take a look at it.
The server could actually store the user
information in the database upon the first request
from the user
and then for every subsequent request from the same user
the server could actually pull the database information
for all the users match it with the
incoming users information and then understand
that it's the same user who has come before,
but making a database trip for every request
is going to be a very expensive and time consuming process.
So that's not feasible.
There is the session management that you can implement
with Enterprise Java Beans, which is EJBs API,
but that's all together another topic
and it is not under the serverless JSP API.
So in order to solve this session tracking problem
serverless specification has offered as the
HTTPSession API for session management.
The HTTPSession is going to be created
so it's an object and that gets created for every user
and then we can use that object to store the information
pertaining to the user.
Now just so that the server does not
go and overwrite one users information
with another users information
each user will be given a session object
of his or her own
and every object is going to be uniquely identified
by a session ID.
So the server is going to setup the session ID
to uniquely track
every users session information.
So when you use HTTPSession API for session management
this is how the solution will look like.
Let's say the client comes in with the first
request to the server site
the server is going to generate that session ID
and give it back to the client as apart of the response.
Every subsequent request
that further comes from the same client
this session ID is going to travel
from the client to the server
so that the server recognizes
that it is the same user.
So essentially this server
is going to help the client
and the client is going to help the server.
They're going to work together
and of course the session ID
needs to get exchanged between them
continuously for every request response chain.
This session ID can be exchanged by two ways.
Either by cookies or by URL rewriting.
We will look at how the session ID gets exchanged
through cookies in the next video.